Frodo woke suddenly. It was still dark in the room. Merry
was standing there with a candle in one hand, and banging
on the door with the other. ‘All right! What is it?’ said Frodo,
still shaken and bewildered.
‘What is it!’ cried Merry. ‘It is time to get up. It is half past
four and very foggy. Come on! Sam is already getting breakfast
ready. Even Pippin is up. I am just going to saddle the ponies,
and fetch the one that is to be the baggage-carrier. Wake that
sluggard Fatty! At least he must get up and see us off.’
Soon after six o’clock the five hobbits were ready to start.
Fatty Bolger was still yawning. They stole quietly out of the
house. Merry went in front leading a laden pony, and took
his way along a path that went through a spinney behind the
house, and then cut across several fields. The leaves of trees
were glistening, and every twig was dripping; the grass was
grey with cold dew. Everything was still, and far-away noises
seemed near and clear: fowls chattering in a yard, someone
closing a door of a distant house.
In their shed they found the ponies: sturdy little beasts of
the kind loved by hobbits, not speedy, but good for a long
day’s work. They mounted, and soon they were riding off
into the mist, which seemed to open reluctantly before them
and close forbiddingly behind them. After riding for about
an hour, slowly and without talking, they saw the Hedge
looming suddenly ahead. It was tall and netted over with
silver cobwebs.
‘How are you going to get through this?’ asked Fredegar.
‘Follow me!’ said Merry, ‘and you will see.’ He turned to
the left along the Hedge, and soon they came to a point where
it bent inwards, running along the lip of a hollow. A cutting
had been made, at some distance from the Hedge, and went
sloping gently down into the ground. It had walls of brick at
the sides, which rose steadily, until suddenly they arched over
and formed a tunnel that dived deep under the Hedge and
came out in the hollow on the other side.
Here Fatty Bolger halted. ‘Good-bye, Frodo!’ he said. ‘I
wish you were not going into the Forest. I only hope you will
not need rescuing before the day is out. But good luck to you
– today and every day!’
‘If there are no worse things ahead than the Old Forest, I
shall be lucky,’ said Frodo. ‘Tell Gandalf to hurry along the
East Road: we shall soon be back on it and going as fast as
we can.’ ‘Good-bye!’ they cried, and rode down the slope
and disappeared from Fredegar’s sight into the tunnel.
It was dark and damp. At the far end it was closed by a
gate of thick-set iron bars. Merry got down and unlocked the
gate, and when they had all passed through he pushed it to
again. It shut with a clang, and the lock clicked. The sound
was ominous.
‘There!’ said Merry. ‘You have left the Shire, and are now
outside, and on the edge of the Old Forest.’
‘Are the stories about it true?’ asked Pippin.
‘I don’t know what stories you mean,’ Merry answered. ‘If
you mean the old bogey-stories Fatty’s nurses used to tell
him, about goblins and wolves and things of that sort, I
should say no. At any rate I don’t believe them. But the
Forest is queer. Everything in it is very much more alive,
more aware of what is going on, so to speak, than things are
in the Shire. And the trees do not like strangers. They watch
you. They are usually content merely to watch you, as long
as daylight lasts, and don’t do much. Occasionally the most
unfriendly ones may drop a branch, or stick a root out, or
grasp at you with a long trailer. But at night things can be
most alarming, or so I am told. I have only once or twice
been in here after dark, and then only near the hedge. I
thought all the trees were whispering to each other, passing
news and plots along in an unintelligible language; and the